2019-12-03 Cut apart the insights from drafts/triage-conversation-with-bob.txt
and put them where they go.

2016-02-26 Store nginx config to prevent invalid caching in repository. This is
currently an issue in prod.

2015-12-30 Add an RSS feed generated from commit logs, so people who are
interested in ongoing updates can subscribe.

2013-02-28 An overall article "Why" might be a good plan. I could expand on my
minimalist summary of why I write software from my website.

2015-12-30 How to make an effective team would be a good article. Summarize
what I explained to Melanie the other day.

2015-12-30 An article on backups, and how they're not actually backups unless a
human signs off on the verification process.

2013-02-28 An article on indentation (category 'formatting') would be good. Why
it matters, why use spaces, why nesting level matters (and thus why to wrap at
80 chars), and why above all formatting should be automated by the project
tooling.

2013-11-12 The "Fail Gracefully" article needs to explain what is meant by
failing gracefully. Running it past Stephanie as a test made it clear that it
is not clear.

2013-03-13 Based on a conversation with Jim... A commit should do at least one
of two things: 1) improve the project's UI, or 2) make the programmers' lives
easier.

2013-03-14 Inspired by the above, I should probably do a set of articles on
version control. Why I need it, what it's for, what I use and how I use it.

2013-03-27 It might be madness, but when signing a user up for a
timezone-sensitive app, we can probably use JS to default the selected timezone
to something near them.

2013-03-27 Reconcile my approach to validation with translation and value/field
label substitutions for error messages. Remember that 'required' is not a
validation.

2013-03-27 Explain why interfaces should only publicize things that *have* to
be publicized. design, code as UI.

2014-01-11 Split the code review article into two articles. One goes in meta,
about human reliability (we always make mistakes), and serves as a touchstone
for that idea in this website (probably the "Fail Gracefully" article). The
other is actually a workflow article, on how to do code review.

2014-01-11 Consider extracting the comment on "usability testing" from the code
review article to its own article. Tricky because I have so little experience
of actual usability testing. That might be related to part of the hypotheticals
rant.

2015-05-13 Explain POCs, prototypes, and production code - what they are and
when each one is called for. Not sure what article this belongs in.
