Communicating
-------------

Communication is extremely hard.

I have derived a few guidelines I have found helpful. Every time I have
violated them, I have regretted it.

Some of them (like always telling the truth) I have held deeply since my teens,
while others are the byproduct of painful discovery.

* Always tell the truth. Nothing good comes of lying, and when the victim finds
  out you lied, they will rightly distrust you.

* Do not be a go-between. If two people need to discuss something, get them in
  touch and get out of the way. Having you in the middle will only make it
  harder for them to understand each other.

  However, if those two people have a hard time communicating, then it may be
  helpful for someone to help facilitate their communication, usually by
  sitting down in the same physical place with them.

  You may not be the best person to do that - if the issue is a language
  barrier and you don't speak both the languages, you will likely just make it
  worse. Always be ready and willing to facilitate, but don't assume you're the
  only option.

* When planning with others, make clear, explicit commitments, describe how
  you'll achieve them, and define failure contingencies. Don't say "I'll try to
  make it to the team dinner around 5:30" - say "I'll set a reminder to wrap up
  programming at 5:20 and be at the dinner by 5:30. I'll send a text if
  something urgent comes up and delays me."

  Vagueness and weasel words do not actually make you reliable - they just make
  it hard for others to blame you when things go wrong, at the cost of making
  it hard for others to know what to expect of you. Others will rightly resent
  you for doing that.

  This is a specific example of managing expectations proactively - see that
  point for more details.

* Manage expectations proactively, and do your best to keep them aligned with
  reality.

  When you sense unrealistic expectations or realize that you have created
  them, try to adjust them as soon as you can.

  This is especially important if people are expecting something good when they
  shouldn't be.

  If expectations are too positive, reality will eventually adjust them by
  means of blunt force trauma.

  Long-term, everyone will be happier if you try to prevent that trauma. Doing
  so may cause some suffering now, but doing nothing will cause much more
  suffering eventually.

  Your impulse to avoid pain will push you away from adjusting positive
  expectations downwards, but that impulse is hurting you. The only thing down
  the road of padding or spinning unpleasant information is more pain.


--------------

Unrelated to the above, it's important to remember that when you're
understanding someone else's problems, it's not enough to be an expert in the
field.

You also need to be a great communicator.

Otherwise, your relationships and processes will break down badly, in the way
demonstrated in this comical video:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BKorP55Aqvg

I once thought that video showed the plight of experts flawlessly.

I slowly realized that in reality, it shows a failure mode of experts who have
not mastered communication and conflict resolution (a category I was long an
unaware member of).

The non-experts look for an expert's help in understanding a problem and
defining the requirements for a solution because they do not have the expertise
themselves.

That means they will communicate poorly, misuse words, and misunderstand things
about the field. They cannot do anything else. That's why they hired the
expert.

The expert's job is to patiently, systematically come to a clear understanding
of their problem, then to propose a solution that does the job well. She should
be ready to resolve confusion, misunderstandings, and misnaming of things by
the laypeople, graciously and patiently.

I have a long way to go, but I do finally understand that truth.

First wrote about this here on HN:
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23846777


----------------

RFC 7282 has a lot of wisdom about how to run meetings, discussions, and even
cultures in a way that helps leadership understand whether they truly have
consensus. This has a lot of bearing on both communication and meeting
technique.

Meeting technique should have its own essay, but it's worth noting that
meetings are about making decisions as a group, which is itself closely linked
to the ideas about consensus and voting in RC 7282 (which, I just realized, has
a great deal to do with ensuring that all parties feel seen and heard - they
may not get the solution they want, but a leader who's sticking to RFC 7282's
suggestions is doing their best to ensure everyone who has a complaint or
concern is listened to and that the group has tried to consider and address the
complaint as appropriate).

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7282https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7282
