Writing
=======

:date: 2013-01-01
:category: Fundamentals
:summary: ???

If a programmer is making a tool that will be used by other people, she will
have to communicate with them about it.

Writing is her most powerful tool for doing that.

Speaking and listening are also crucial skills for a programmer, but they apply
mainly in face-to-face conversations, which are not always feasible, and tend
to consume more time than intended (many people live in dread of meetings that
have no value for them).

The written word enables a long-lasting, accessible record of thought. Even for
those who cannot see or read, assistive technology like screenreaders let them
access written ideas.

Text is searchable. Thoughts preserved as images, audio, or video must be
manually sorted through, sifting for the ideas the viewer seeks.

Writing is referenceable. People can remember or record the place in a document
a particular idea is written and find it again, as well as refer other people
to it.

Writing is random-access. It's simple, especially with hypertext and a table of
contents, to jump immediately to the part you want, without prior knowledge of
the document.

Writing can be processed out-of-band. It does not require recipients to disrupt
their schedule for the author's convenience, and thus lets people organize
their time as they wish.

For these reasons, prefer written communications by default.

When should we avoid writing?

When having conversations about emotionally-charged subjects, face-to-face
conversation is the best approach. It is much harder to read moods and
reactions in text, and it is much easier to hide them.

Writing is ineffective if used with those who cannot or will not read. American
literacy is poor enough that such people are extremely common (especially in
large corporations, where the hiring bar is low).

When heavy knowledge transfer must take place quickly, writing is not ideal,
since writing well takes time. However, it is extremely rare for only one
person to need the the transferred knowledge. If it is truly a one-time
transfer, record the conversation, so it can be transcribed when the "one-time"
label turns out to be false.

When working on software, prefer writing in public to private, and searchable
media to static ones. More people can benefit from written records if they are
freely available, and easy to find via search, so unless there is a good reason
to keep writing private, keep it public.
